Addiction and Depression - excerpt - Opioid Effectiveness,Addiction, and Depression in Chronic Pain 
-- from Pain and Depression - An Interdisciplinary Patient-Centered Approach
Editors: M.R. Clark Baltimore, Md. and G.J. Treisman Baltimore, Md.


Addiction
The  role  of  opioids  for  the  treatment  of  chronic,  nonmalignant  pain
remains controversial, despite growing acceptance of this practice. The litera-
ture confirms the beneficial use of opioids for noncancer pain [42] but more
long-term studies are needed to support the use of opioids in non-cancer pain
patients.
When using opioids to manage chronic nonmalignant pain, clinicians must
consider (1) whether opioids improve the patient’s physical and psychological
functioning and (2) the patient’s potential for addiction. Pain specialists strug-
gle to achieve a balance between improving a patient’s pain through opioid use
and interfering with a patient’s functioning in a manner that could worsen dis-
ability  or  even  obviate  the  gain  in  pain  control.  The  data  demonstrate  that
addiction is unlikely to occur due to opioid exposure in the presence of chronic
pain [43], and it is not clear that the prevalence of addiction is greater in the
chronic pain population than in the general population. Clinical experience in
using  opioids  to  treat  cancer  pain  demonstrates  low  abuse  potential  in  this
group, unless there is a history of substance abuse; therefore, assessment for
aberrant  drug-related  behavior  among  chronic  pain  patients  is  important  to
manage these patients with opioid therapy properly.
The prevalence of drug abuse, dependence, or addiction in chronic pain
patients  ranges  from  approximately  3  to  19%  [44]. Yet,  addictive  disorders
occur  in  approximately  3–26%  of  the  general  population  [45,  46]  and  in
40–60% of patients who suffered major trauma [47–49]. Therefore, pain physi-
cians  are  likely  to  encounter  patients  with  a  concurrent  addictive  disorder.
Recognizing aberrant drug-related behavior can assist in effectively screening
patients for addiction in pain treatment settings.
To  refine  the  concept  of  addiction  in  the  context  of  chronic  pain,  the
American Society of Addiction Medicine, the American Pain Society, and the
American Academy of Pain Medicine agreed on the following definition that
supports our neurobiologic and psychologic understanding of addiction [50]:
‘[Addiction  is]  a  primary,  chronic,  neurobiologic  disease  with  genetic,  psy-
chosocial, and environmental factors influencing its development and manifes-
tations.  It  is  characterized  by  behaviors  that  include  one  or  more  of  the
following: impaired control over drug use, continued use despite harm, com-
pulsive use, and craving’. In order to treat pain effectively, aberrant drug-related
behavior should be noted, and addiction should be addressed concurrently.
In assessing for addiction during opioid use, the clinician should collect
the patient’s personal and family history of substance abuse as well as relevant
objective information from the physical examination, observation, and labora-
tory tests. The clinician should also use appropriate screening instruments, such
as the CAGE-AID [51].
When treating patients with opioids for long periods of time, it is impor-
tant  to  follow  them  regularly  and  identify  behavior  suggestive  of  addiction.
Behavior  that  should  prompt  investigation  includes:  continued  use  of  drugs
despite adverse consequences or harm secondary to use, loss of control over
drug use, and preoccupation with use due to craving. A pattern of such behav-
ior,  rather  than  intermittent  manifestation  of  one  or  two  of  these  actions,
warrants further assessment. Further examination into each behavior will assist
in identifying key features of aberrant behavior.
The beneficial effects of opioids may be hindered by the phenomenon of
tolerance. Patients deriving benefit from opioids should experience a reduction
in  pain  and  maintenance  or  improvement  of  function  in  areas  such  as  rela-
tionships,  work,  sleep,  and  mood. When  using  opioids  improperly,  however,
patients  tend  to  develop  impaired  psychosocial  functioning.  For  instance,
addicted patients tend to lose function in critical aspects of life relating to their
jobs,  friendships,  mood,  and  familial  relationships.  Consequently,  patients
being treated with opioids who persist in their disability or experience deterio-
ration in the functional activities of living despite rehabilitative support may
suffer from addiction or substance abuse. Likewise, changes in mental status or
intoxication from opioids may reflect a desire for the euphoric reward of the
medication rather than a need for its analgesic benefit. Tolerance to the anal-
gesic effects of opioids does not develop quickly in patients receiving the med-
ication properly for pain [52]. Tolerance to opioid-induced euphoria, however,
does  develop  rapidly,  necessitating  higher  doses  to  achieve  the  same  effect.
Patients with active addiction thus tend to escalate the dose of opioid to attain
this euphoric state [53]. This pattern of behavior probably highlights an addic-
tive response to the opioid in a way that promotes continued use of the drug
despite adverse consequences.
Of course, pain specialists should consider other possible causes of aber-
rant behavior such as pseudoaddiction, i.e., drug-seeking behavior due to inad-
equate  dosage  of  opioid  [54],  opioid-resistant  pain,  continual  sedation  at
analgesic  doses,  and  opioid-induced  hyperalgesia.  Recognizing  patterns  of
aberrant  behaviors,  rather  than  isolated  behaviors,  will  aid  in  assessing  for
addiction.
Compulsive use of opioids leads to a loss of control over drug use and rep-
resents addictive behavior. In this circumstance, patients lose control over med-
ication use due to an intense craving for the substance. In the context of treating
chronic  pain,  patients  may  overuse  opioids  and  request  early  prescription
refills. Such patients may report theft or loss of medications, pills falling into
the toilet or down the drain, or pets consuming opioid prescriptions. Indeed,
these excuses may indicate impaired control over opioid medications. Patients
may also impute overuse of opioids to inadequate treatment of pain and display
withdrawal symptoms at the appointment because they have depleted the opi-
oid supply in advance. While these circumstances may occasionally occur in
patients using opioids properly, a pattern of such aberrant behavior should raise
concern about addiction.
When assessing for possible addiction in chronic pain patients receiving
opioids, it is important to examine a preoccupation with drug use due to crav-
ing. Many patients who receive opioids for chronic pain understandably desire
continual  relief  of  pain  through  an  uninterrupted  supply  of  opioids.  Such
patients may show intense interest in maintaining regular availability of opioids
to ensure analgesia and forestall withdrawal. Further, they may inquire about
the physician’s vacation plans or demand reminders about clinic hours. Though
this behavior does not indicate addiction, it may suggest an addictive response
to opioids if the patient fails to comply with other treatment modalities. For
instance, the pain specialist should confirm whether the patient actively partic-
ipates in physical therapy, occupational therapy, and cognitive behavioral inter-
ventions,  takes  adjuvant  medications,  and  appears  amenable  to  considering
other strategies for managing pain. If patients display no interest in applying
nonopioid approaches to their analgesic regimen, then their preoccupation with
opioid use suggests addiction.
If the pain specialist does not detect a pattern of aberrant behavior, he or
she can be fairly confident that the patient does not suffer from an active addic-
tive disorder. In general, patients in the pain treatment setting who comply with
recommended interventions, report meaningful pain relief from opioid therapy,
use  opioids  as  prescribed,  and  improve  their  functional  capacity  are  likely
responding  to  the  medications  appropriately  and  not  engaging  in  addictive
behavior. Although patterns of positive behavior support the proper use of opi-
oids, growing evidence reveals that monitoring behavior without confirmatory
urine toxicology screening may fail to detect opioid misuse. For instance, both
Katz and Fanicullo [55] and Belgrade [56] found that self-reports of inappro-
priate  drug  use  among  chronic  pain  patients  correlated  poorly  with  urine
toxicology  findings.  In  short,  incorporating  observed  patterns  of  behavior,
interviews  with  significant  others,  review  of  medical  records,  and  urine
toxicology monitoring can improve patient management with chronic opioid
therapy.


Depression
Many  physicians  have  argued  that  chronic  opioid  therapy  increases
depressed mood and disability. Yet few studies demonstrate such a correlation.
An examination of the relationship between chronic pain and depression may
permit  a  more  thorough  understanding  of  the  influence  of  depression  on
patients suffering from chronic pain.
Depression seems to be a pervasive component of chronic pain [57]. In
fact, patients with chronic pain and depression tend to report greater pain inten-
sity,  greater  disability,  decreased  activity  levels,  poor  adjustment,  and  poor
treatment outcome compared with chronic pain patients who are not depressed
[58]. Yet, the literature fails to describe the extent to which chronic pain and
depression  coexist,  whether  a  causal  relationship  exists,  or  the  mechanism
through which depression and pain intermingle.
The reported prevalence of depression among chronic pain patients ranges
from 10 to 100% [59, 60]. Such variability probably stems from inconsistencies
in  defining  a  case  as  well  as  from  variability  in  assessment  methods  for
depression. Depression rates may include patients with major depressive disor-
der  (MDD),  depressive  symptoms,  or  affective  disorders  like  dysthymia  or
adjustment disorder. Hence, only some of the studies report accurate rates of
depression based on standardized diagnostic criteria. Overlapping symptoma-
tology between depression and chronic pain further complicates the accurate
assessment of depression in this population. For instance, chronic pain symp-
toms,  such  as  loss  of  energy,  sleep  disturbance,  and  appetite  and  weight
changes, are also diagnostic features of MDD.
Several authors estimate that 30–54% of outpatient chronic pain patients
suffer from MDD [61, 62]. This exceeds the current (5%) and lifetime (17%)
prevalence estimates for MDD in the general population [63]. In comparing
depression rates in chronic pain with other chronic medical conditions, Banks
and Kerns [64] were unable to make a definitive conclusion that MDD is more
common in patients suffering with chronic pain than in other chronic medical
populations. They  did  conclude,  however,  that  empirical  data  supported  the
notion that higher depression rates exist among patients with chronic pain. A
growing body of empirical evidence from retrospective studies suggests that
chronic pain leads to depression [65, 66].
Magni et al. [67] conducted a longitudinal study of 2,324 patients with
musculoskeletal pain to determine whether pain predicts depressive symptoms
or vice versa. They found that pain is the strongest predictor of depression in
comparison  with  other  demographic  variables. The  researchers  hypothesized
that certain pain states may be more likely to elicit depression, though depres-
sion may also be associated with the onset of specific types of pain.
The observation that a greater proportion of patients with chronic pain may
develop MDD than of those with other chronic medical conditions suggests that
a component of the pain syndrome accounts for the higher comorbidity. Banks
and Kerns [64] proposed that chronic pain patients may think and behave dif-
ferently  in  response  to  pain  and  that  this  modulation  of  thought  may  elicit
depression. Specifically, the way in which a patient in chronic pain processes
the pain experience (changes in life activities, duration, controllability, severity,
or  suffering)  may  predispose  him/her  to  depression.  Other  factors  that  may
contribute to depression in chronic pain patients include the type of behavior
exhibited by the patient in pain as well as the response given by others to the
patient’s pain behavior.