Maha Bandha (the great lock) 
Sit in siddha/siddha yoni asana or padmasana with the 
hands on the knees. The spine should be erect and the 
head straight. Close the eyes and relax the whole body. 
Breathe in slowly and deeply through the nose. 
Exhale forcefully and completely through the mouth. 
Retain the breath outside. 
Successively perform jalandhara, uddiyana and moola 
bandhas in this order. 
Hold the bandhas and the breath for as long as is 
comfortable without straining. 
Then release moola, uddiyana and jalandhara bandhas in 
this order. 
Inhale slowly when the head is upright. 
This is one round. 
Keep the eyes closed, relax the body and let the breath 
return to normal before commencing another round. 
Awareness: Physical - after performing the bandhas rotate the 
consciousness through the perineal, abdominal and throat 
regions in turn. Remain aware of each region for a few 
seconds and then move to the next. 
419 Spiritual - after performing the bandhas, rotate the 
consciousness through mooladhara, manipura and 
vishuddhi chakras in turn. Remain aware of each chakra 
for a few seconds and then move to the next. 
Duration: Once proficiency is attained, and only then, increase 
by one round over a period of time until 9 rounds can be 
performed. 
Precaution: Do not attempt maha bandha until the other three 
bandhas have been mastered. 
Contra-indications: People suffering from high or low blood 
pressure, heart conditions, stroke, hernia, stomach or 
intestinal ulcer, and those recovering from any visceral 
ailment should avoid this practice. Pregnant women should 
also not attempt this practice. 
Benefits: Maha bandha gives the benefits of all three bandhas. 
It affects the hormonal secretions of the pineal gland and 
regulates the entire endocrine system. The decaying, 
degenerative and ageing processes are checked and every 
cell of the body is rejuvenated. It soothes anger and 
introverts the mind prior to meditation. When perfected 
it can fully awaken prana in the main chakras. It leads to 
the merger of prana, apana and samana in agni mandala, 
which is the culmination of all pranayamas. 
Practice note: Maha bandha can also be performed from utthan 
padasana. 
Note: The Sanskrit word maha means 'great'. Maha bandha is called 
the great lock as it combines all the three bandhas in one practice. 
For the traditional hatha yoga technique refer to the Bihar School 
of Yoga publication Hatha Yoga Pradipika. 