Teaching

Krishnamurti called for a radical revolution in the inward psychological makeup of man, claiming it to be the only way to eradicate conflict and suffering in the world, which he saw as absolutely necessary. He described the establishment of 'total' psychological order, which would also bring order outwardly in all walks of life. To this end he enquired deeply into the causes of psychological conflict and disorder. His talks largely dealt with the deeper problems of fear, desire and 'becoming', to which he associated the fallacy of psychological time. He also pointed out that a verbal understanding of his teaching was insufficient for change and that words and images acted as barriers against direct inward observation. As a result of this perceived need for immediacy in learning, Krishnamurti wrote comparatively little and his published works are largely transcribed from recorded public talks, many of which are available online. However the following summary of his teaching was written by Krishnamurti in 1980 at the request of his biographer Mary Lutyens:

    The core of Krishnamurti’s teaching is contained in the statement he made in 1929 when he said 'Truth is a pathless land'. Man cannot come to it through any organization, through any creed, through any dogma, priest or ritual, not through any philosophical knowledge or psychological technique. He has to find it through the mirror of relationship, through the understanding of the contents of his own mind, through observation and not through intellectual analysis or introspective dissection. Man has built in himself images as a fence of security — religious, political, personal. These manifest as symbols, ideas, beliefs. The burden of these dominate man’s thinking, relationships and daily life. These are the causes of our problems for they divide man from man in every relationship. His perception of life is shaped by the concepts already established in his mind. The content of his consciousness is this consciousness. This content is common to all humanity. The individuality is the name, the form and superficial culture he acquires from his environment. The uniqueness of the individual does not lie in the superficial but in the total freedom from the content of consciousness.

    Freedom is not a reaction; freedom is not choice. It is man’s pretence that because he has choice he is free. Freedom is pure observation without direction, without fear of punishment and reward. Freedom is without motive; freedom is not at the end of the evolution of man but lies in the first step of his existence. In observation one begins to discover the lack of freedom. Freedom is found in the choiceless awareness of our daily existence.

    Thought is time. Thought is born of experience, of knowledge, which are inseparable from time. Time is the psychological enemy of man. Our action is based on knowledge and therefore time, so man is always a slave to the past.

    When man becomes aware of the movement of his own consciousness he will see the division between the thinker and the thought, the observer and the observed, the experiencer and the experience. He will discover that this division is an illusion. Then only is there pure observation which is insight without any shadow of the past. This timeless insight brings about a deep radical change in the mind.
    Total negation is the essence of the positive. When there is negation of all those things which are not love - desire, pleasure - then love is, with its compassion and intelligence.
    —?J. Krishnamurti, The Core of the Teaching, October 1980
