The Road to Happiness 



FOR over two thousand years it has been the custom 
among earnest moralists to decry happiness as some- 
thing degraded and unworthy. The Stoics, for centu- 
ries, attacked Epicurus, who preached happiness; they said that 
his was a pig's philosophy, and showed their superior virtue 
by inventing scandalous lies about him. One of them, Clean- 
thes, wanted Aristarchus persecuted for advocating the Co- 
pernican system of astronomy; another, Marcus Aurelius, 
persecuted the Christians; one of the most famous of them, 
Seneca, abetted Nero's abominations, amassed a vast fortune, 
and lent money to Boadicea at such an exorbitant rate of in- 
terest that she was driven into rebellion. So much for antiq- 
uity. Skipping the next 2,000 years, we come to the German 
professors who invented the disastrous theories that led Ger- 
many to its downfall and the rest of the world to its present 
perilous state; all these learned men despised happiness, as did 
their British imitator, Carlyle, who is never weary of telling 
us that we ought to eschew happiness in favor of blessedness. 
He found blessedness in rather odd places: Cromwell's Irish 
massacres, Frederick the Great's bloodthirsty perfidy, and 
Governor Eyre's Jamaican brutality. In fact, contempt for 
happiness is usually contempt for other people's happiness, 
and is an elegant disguise for hatred of the human race. Even 
when a man genuinely sacrifices his own happiness in favor of 
something that he thinks nobler, he is apt to remain envious of 
those who enjoy a lesser degree of nobility, and this envy 
will, all too often, make those who think themselves saints 
cruel and destructive. In our day the most important exam- 
ples of this mentality are the Communists. 

People who have theories as to how one should live tend to 
forget the limitations of nature. If your way of life involves 
constant restraint of impulse for the sake of some one supreme 
aim that you have set yourself, it is likely that the aim will 
become increasingly distasteful because of the efforts that it 
demands; impulse, denied its normal outlets, will find others, 
probably in spite; pleasure, if you allow yourself any at all, 
will be dissociated from the main current of your life, and 
will become Bacchic and frivolous. Such pleasure brings 
no happiness, but only a deeper despair. 

It is a commonplace among moralists that you cannot get 
happiness by pursuing it. This is only true if you pursue it 
unwisely. Gamblers at Monte Carlo are pursuing money, 
and most of them lose it instead, but there are other ways of 
pursuing money which often succeed. So it is with happiness. 
If you pursue it by means of drink, you are forgetting the 
.hangover. Epicurus pursued it by living in congenial society 
and eating only dry bread, supplemented by a little cheese on 
feast days. His method proved successful, in his case, but he 
was a valetudinarian, and most people would need something 
more vigorous. For most people, the pursuit of happiness, un- 
less supplemented in various ways, is too abstract and theoret- 
ical to be adequate as a personal rule of life. But I think that 
whatever personal rule of life you may choose, it should not, 
except in rare heroic cases, be incompatible with happiness. 

There are a great many people who have the mate- 
rial conditions of happiness, i.e. health and a sufficient income, . 
and who, nevertheless, are profoundly unhappy. This is espe- 
cially true in America. In such cases it would seem as if the 
fault must lie with a wrong theory as to how to live. In one 
sense we may say that any theory as to how to live is wrong. 

We imagine ourselves more different from the animals than 
we are. Animals live on impulse, and are happy as long as ex- 
ternal conditions are favorable. If you have a cat, it will en- 
joy life if it has food and warmth and opportunities for an 
occasional night on the tiles. Your needs are more complex 
than those of your cat, but they still have their basis in in- 
stinct. In civilized societies, especially in English-speaking so- 
cieties, this is too apt to be forgotten. People propose to them- 
selves some one paramount objective, and restrain all impulses 
that do not minister to it. A businessman may be so anxious 
to grow rich that to this end he sacrifices health and the pri- 
vate affections. When at last he has become rich, no pleasure 
remains to him except harrying other people by exhortations 
to imitate his noble example. Many rich ladies, although na- 
ture has not endowed them with any spontaneous pleasure in 
literature or art, decide to be thought cultured, and spend 
boring hours learning the right thing to say about fashionable 
new books. It does not occur to them that books are written 
to give delight, not to afford opportunities for a dusty snob- 
bism. 

If you look about you at the men and women whom you 
can call happy, you will see that they all have certain things in 
common. The most important of these things is an activity 
which at most times is enjoyable on its own account, and 
which, in addition, gradually builds up something that you 
are glad to see coming into existence. Women who take an 
instinctive pleasure in their children (which many women, 
especially educated women, do not) can get this kind of sat- 
isfaction out of bringing up a family. Artists and authors and 
men of science get happiness in this way if their own work 
seems good to them. But there are many humbler forms of 
the same kind of pleasure. Many men who spend their work- 
ing life in the City devote their weekends to voluntary and 
unremunerated toil in their gardens, and when the spring 
comes they experience all the joys of having created beauty. 
It is impossible to be happy without activity, but it is also 
impossible to be happy if the activity is excessive or of a re- 
pulsive kind. Activity is agreeable when it is directed very 
obviously to a desired end and is not in itself contrary to im- 
pulse. A dog will pursue rabbits to the point of complete ex- 
haustion and be happy all the time, but if you put the dog on 
a treadmill and gave him a good dinner after half an hour, he 
would not be happy till he got the dinner, because he would 
not have been engaged in a natural activity meanwhile. One 
of the difficulties of our time is that, in a complex modern so- 
ciety, few of the things that have to be done have the natural- 
ness of hunting. The consequence is that most people, in a 
technically advanced community, have to find their happiness 
outside the work by which they make their living. And if 
their work is exhausting their pleasures will tend to be passive. 
Watching a football match or going to the cinema leaves little 
satisfaction afterward, and does not in any degree gratify cre- 
ative impulses. The satisfaction of the players, who are active, 
is of quite a different order. 

The wish to be respected by neighbors and the fear of being 
despised by them drive men and women (especially women) 
into ways of behavior which are not prompted by any spon- 
taneous impulse. The person who is always "correct" is al- 
ways bored, or almost always. It is heartrending to watch 
mothers teaching their children to curb their joy of life and 
become sedate puppets, lest they should be thought to belong 
to a lower social class than that to which their parents aspire. 

The pursuit of social success, in the form of prestige or 
power or both, is the most important obstacle to happiness in 
a competitive society. I am not denying that success is an 
ingredient in happiness to some, a very important ingredient. 

But it does not, by itself, suffice to satisfy most people. You 
may be rich and admired, but if you have no friends, no in- 
terests, no spontaneous useless pleasures, you will be miser- 
able. Living for social success is one form of living by a the- 
ory, and all living by theory is dusty and desiccating. 

If a man or woman who is healthy and has enough to eat is 
to be happy, there is need of two things that, at first sight, 
might seem antagonistic. There is need, first, of a stable 
framework built round a central purpose, and second, of 
what may be called "play," that is to say, of things that are 
done merely because they are fun, and not because they serve 
some serious end. The settled framework must be an embodi- 
ment of fairly constant impulses, e.g. those connected with 
family or work. If the family has become steadily hateful, or 
the work uniformly irksome, they can no longer bring hap- 
piness; but it is worth while to endure occasional hatefulness 
or irksomeness if they are not felt continually. And they are 
much less likely to be felt continually if advantage is taken of 
opportunities for "play." 

The whole subject of happiness has, in my opinion, been 
treated too solemnly. It has been thought that men cannot be 
happy without a theory of life or a religion. Perhaps those 
who have been rendered unhappy by a bad theory may need 
a better theory to help them to recovery, just as you may need 
a tonic when you have been ill. But when things are normal a 
man should be healthy without a tonic and happy without a 
theory. It is the simple things that really matter. If a man de- 
lights in his wife and children, has success in work, and finds 
pleasure in the alternation of day and night, spring and au- 
tumn, he will be happy whatever his philosophy may be. If, 
on the other hand, he finds his wife hateful, his children's 
noise unendurable, and the office a nightmare; if in the day- 
time he longs for night, and at night he sighs for the light of 
day then what he needs is not a new philosophy but a new 
regimen a different diet, or more exercise, or what not. Man 
is an animal, and his happiness depends upon his physiology 
more than he likes to think. This is a humble conclusion, but 
I cannot make myself disbelieve it. Unhappy businessmen, I 
am convinced, would increase their happiness more by walk- 
ing six miles every day than by any conceivable change of 
philosophy. This, incidentally, was the opinion of Jefferson, 
who on this ground deplored the horse. Language would have 
failed him if he could have foreseen the motor car. 